# (Proposal) Generating stubs automatically

One of the more arduous tasks of creating a library is writing the stubs for it.
This proposal aims to provide tooling to simplify this process and partially automate it.
There are existing stub generators for Python (like [
`stubgen` from `mypy`](https://mypy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/stubgen.html), tooling from [
`pyright`](https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/blob/main/docs/type-stubs.md#generating-type-stubs-from-command-line),
and more).
These stub generators are often meant to provide a start for writing stubs for a given chunk of Python, but often
require manual labor to clean, fix, and clarify generated code. While the aim of this proposal is not to necessarily
fully automate the process, there are additional considerations which, if not automated, can cause great slowdowns for
library developer workflows.

General difficulties around stub generation, that the above generators have (more or less successfully) resolved,
include:

- Types mentioned in signatures may come from imports (which you want to preserve, since importing from their
  implementing module may reveal implementation details), or be defined locally, in which case you need to include them
  in the stubs as well.
- Pythonic public re-exports should be preserved / made available in the stubs
- When depending on types provided from imports (i.e. defined in other files), these types need to be included in the
  stubs for that other file, even if they may be unused there

Special difficulties for the Guppy ecosystem and compile time Python include:

- Instead of preserving the `@guppy` decorator (or whatever custom decorator was used), we have to use `@guppy.declare`
  in the stubs
- The link name should always be fixed in the stubs, to avoid changes in the default link name inference mechanism
  breaking the stubs (and thus the library interface) without any observable change in the source code of the library
- Structs and enums need to be included in the stubs for typing reasons, but the interaction with nominal typing is
  unclear
- Guppy functions may be generated by Python "factory" functions, that may provide some types / arguments at compile
  time, especially for generic numeric parameters. Thus, we need a very careful mix of resolving types, but recalling
  the original source and definition sites if they cannot be fully resolved (e.g. boiled to a single number).

## Validation

When writing stubs (especially those generated automatically), it is important to be able to validate that a stub
faithfully represents the definition it corresponds to (or rather, that the definition can be substituted for the stub
without violating the [Liskov substitution principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liskov_substitution_principle)).
Checking may be optionally (i.e. via a flag) strengthened to require equality rather than a subtyping relationship, to
effectively check that:

1. A definition can replace the stub without violating LSP, *and*
2. The stub is the most specific signature that can be used for the definition

This can be extended to take two arbitrary function signatures (with accompanying flags, i.e. from
`@guppy(unitary=True)`), and subsequently check LSP on them.

Such a validation mechanism would be useful for the following use cases:

1. Verifying (automatically, and fit for use in CI) that a definition did not observably break against the stub it
   corresponds to (at least with the typed contract, written contracts cannot be checked).
2. Verifying (mainly for our test cases) that the automatically generated stubs work as intended, and one did not
   discover a new edge case where they do not.
3. Probably more.
